7.1 selections (#156)
UBC-MDS/exploratory-data-viz: chapters/en/slides/module7/module7_01.Rmd

using e.g. different colors and a legend
as we saw an example of in an earlier module.

---

## Tooltips can also add more precise values for dataframe columns on the chart axes

```{python}
alt.Chart(cars).mark_circle().encode(
    alt.X('Horsepower', title='Enging power (hp)'),
    alt.Y('Miles_per_Gallon', title='Fuel efficiency (miles / gal)'),
    tooltip=['Name', 'Horsepower'])
```

Notes:
We can also use tooltips for other information than string labels,
for example when it is important to know an exact value
of a quantitative dataframe column.

In this slide we have added both the `Name` label and the `Horsepower` value
to the tooltip
by specifying them as a list.

As you can see when hovering over the points,
Altair automatically adds the name of the dataframe column
as grey text so that we know what the two values in the tooltip represent.

---

## Points can be linked to an URL to provide more information about the data

```{python}
cars['URL'] = 'https://duckduckgo.com/?q=' + cars['Name']
alt.Chart(cars).mark_circle().encode(
    alt.X('Horsepower', title='Enging power (hp)'),
    alt.Y('Miles_per_Gallon', title='Fuel efficiency (miles / gal)'),

>     href='URL',

Author: Added spacing and described it better in the slide

that checks if an event is present (such as selection) 
and then lets us define what to do if it is `True` and if it is `False`.
You can think of it like this:

```
alt.condition(check-this, if-true-do-this, if-false-do-this)
```

In this plot we check if our selection `brush` is on the points,
and if that is true we use the `Origin` dataframe column to color the points,
otherwise we use the value `'lightgray'`.

`alt.value` is a help function for
when we want to use a single value for all the data points,
rather than values from a column in the dataframe.

You can click to drag the selection around 
and to clear it you can either double click the selection
or click once outside the selected region.

---

## Linking selections between charts helps exploring observations across more columns

```{python}
brush = alt.selection_interval()
 
points = (alt.Chart(cars).mark_circle().encode(
    alt.X('Horsepower', title='Enging power (hp)'),
    alt.Y('Miles_per_Gallon', title='Fuel efficiency (miles / gal)'),
    color=alt.condition(brush, 'Origin', alt.value('lightgray')))
.add_selection(brush))

points | points.encode(y='Weight_in_lbs', x='Acceleration')

> ```

Author: Weird it looks good for me in the settings that I use to emulate hayleys reference setup, will ask her to try later.

> ```

Author: This is a 16:10 issue, we should fix the slide dimensions eventually to avoid these errors

Notes:

> In this slide we have plotted `Horsepower` against `Miles_per_Gallon` 
> and `Acceleration` against `Weight_in_lbs`.
> We can see how the data is spread out in both charts,
> but we don't know how the points are related between the two charts.
> 
> For example,
> we might wonder if the cars with really powerful engines
> and low mileage
> are the ones with low or high acceleration and weight.
> There is not way to tell this from just looking at these two chart
> but by highlighting points in one of the charts,
> the same observations will be highlighted in the other chart.
> 
> Now we can answer our question!
> Our highlight shows that the cars with high engine power and low mileage
> are largely heavy cars with slow acceleration.
> Importantly,
> the relationships of other observations can also be explored in the plot
> without us having to change anything.
> 
> As you can see in this slide
> selections are automatically linked between plots
> that are created from the same base chart,
> so we don't need to add any code to link the selection between the charts
> in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this slide we have created two charts from the same
data frame. In the first we have plotted `Horsepower` 
against `Miles_per_Gallon` 
and in the second we have plotted `Acceleration` against `Weight_in_lbs`.

We can use this to see patterns or relationship between two 
variables within each chart, but we don't know how the points 
are related between the two charts.

For example,
we might wonder if the cars with really powerful engines
and low mileage
are the ones with low or high acceleration and weight.
There is not way to tell this from just looking at these two charts.

However, if we could highlight points of interest in one chart, 
and then see the same observations highlighted in the other 
chart - we would be able to answer such a question!

Altair lets us do this by ... DESCRIBE THE SYNTAX WE USE ON THIS SLIDE HERE.

As you can see in this slide
selections are automatically linked between plots
that are created from the same base chart,
so we don't need to add any code to link the selection between the charts
in this case.

So with these linked views, when we highlight the observations where the cars 
have high engine power and low mileage we see they are the cars that are largely 
heavy,  with slow acceleration. Importantly, the relationships of other observations 
can also be explored in the plot without us having to change anything.
```

---

## Multiple selections can be used to highlight points

```{python}
brush = alt.selection_interval(resolve='intersect')
 
points = (alt.Chart(cars).mark_circle().encode(
    alt.X('Horsepower', title='Enging power (hp)'),
    alt.Y('Miles_per_Gallon', title='Fuel efficiency (miles / gal)'),
    color=alt.condition(brush, 'Origin', alt.value('lightgray')))
.add_selection(brush))

points | points.encode(y='Weight_in_lbs', x='Acceleration')
```

Notes:

> In the previous slide we only had one selection,
> if we started to select in the right hand plot,
> the chart to the left would clear its selection.
> 
> We could modify this behavior so that there are separate selections
> in the the two charts and only points that fall within
> the intersection or union of both the selections are highlighted
> as in this slide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous slide we only had one selection possible at a time.
For example, if we started to first select observations in the chart
on the left, and then started to make another selection in the chart 
on the right hand plot,
the chart to the left would clear its selection.

We can modify this behaviour so that there are separate selections
in the the two charts and only points that fall within
the intersection or union of both the selections are highlighted
as in this slide.
```

Reviewer: Can you explain the second paragraph here a bit further, and explain why this might be useful? Perhaps give an example?
